[Glossary] Alphabetical order and editorial changes in the glossary (#1793)
cntt-n/CNTT: doc/common/glossary.md

<a name="1.1"></a>
## Software Layer Terminology

- **Cloud Infrastructure:** A generic term covering **NFVI**, **IaaS** and **CaaS** capabilities - essentially the infrastructure on which a **Workload** can be executed.
>_*Note:*_ **NFVI**, **IaaS** and **CaaS** layers can be built on top of each other. In case of CaaS some cloud infrastructure features (e.g.: HW management or multitenancy) are implemented by using an underlaying **IaaS** layer.

- **Cloud Infrastructure Profile:** The combination of the Cloud Infrastructure Software Profile and the Cloud Infrastructure Hardware Profile that defines the capabilities of the Cloud Infrastructure.

- **Cloud Infrastructure Software Configuration:** a set of settings (Key:Value) that are applied/mapped to **cloud infrastructure** SW deployment.

- **Cloud Infrastructure Software Profile:** defines the behaviour, capabilities and metrics provided by a Cloud Infrastructure Software Layer.

> - **Cloud Native Network Function (CNF):** A cloud native network function (CNF) is a cloud native application that implements network functionality. A CNF consists of one or more microservices. All layers of a CNF is developed using Cloud Native Principles including immutable infrastructure, declarative APIs, and a “repeatable deployment process”.

Reviewer: nit
```suggestion
- **Cloud Native Network Function (CNF):** A cloud native network function (CNF) is a cloud native application that implements network functionality. A CNF consists of one or more microservices. All layers of a CNF are developed using Cloud Native Principles including immutable infrastructure, declarative APIs, and a “repeatable deployment process”.
```

  >_*Note:*_ A **VM** consists of all of the components (processor (CPU), memory, storage, interfaces/ports, etc.) of a physical computer/server. It is created using sizing information or Compute Flavour.

- **Virtual Network Function (VNF):** a software implementation of a **Network Function**, capable of running on the **Cloud Infrastructure**.
  - **VNF**s are built from one or more VNF Components (**VNFC**) and, in most cases,  the VNFC is hosted on a single VM or Container.

- **Virtual resources:**
  - **Virtual Compute resource (a.k.a. virtualisation container):** partition of a compute node that provides an isolated virtualised computation environment.
  - **Virtual Storage resource:** virtualised non-volatile storage allocated to a virtualised computation environment hosting a **VNFC**.
  - **Virtual Networking resource:** routes information among the network interfaces of a virtual compute resource and physical network interfaces, providing the necessary connectivity.

- **Workload:** Workload refers to software running on top of compute resources such as **VMs** or **Containers**. Most relevant workload categories in context of cloud infrastructure are:

>   - **Data Plane Workloads:** related to packet handling of the end-to-end communication between applications. These tasks are expected to be very I/O and memory read/write operations intensive.

Reviewer: consistency 
```suggestion
  - **Data Plane Workloads:** that perform tasks related to packet handling of the end-to-end communication between applications. These tasks are expected to be very I/O and memory read/write operations intensive.
```

<a name="1.1"></a>
## Software Layer Terminology

- **Cloud Infrastructure:** A generic term covering **NFVI**, **IaaS** and **CaaS** capabilities - essentially the infrastructure on which a **Workload** can be executed.
>_*Note:*_ **NFVI**, **IaaS** and **CaaS** layers can be built on top of each other. In case of CaaS some cloud infrastructure features (e.g.: HW management or multitenancy) are implemented by using an underlaying **IaaS** layer.

- **Cloud Infrastructure Profile:** The combination of the Cloud Infrastructure Software Profile and the Cloud Infrastructure Hardware Profile that defines the capabilities of the Cloud Infrastructure.

- **Cloud Infrastructure Software Configuration:** a set of settings (Key:Value) that are applied/mapped to **cloud infrastructure** SW deployment.

> - **Cloud Infrastructure Software Profile:** defines the behaviour, capabilities and metrics provided by a cloud infrastructure Software Layer

Reviewer: consistency
```suggestion
- **Cloud Infrastructure Software Profile:** defines the behaviour, capabilities and metrics provided by a Cloud Infrastructure Software Layer.
```

> - **Cloud Native Network Function (CNF):** A cloud native network function (CNF) is a cloud native application that implements network functionality. A CNF consists of one or more microservices and has been developed using Cloud Native Principles including immutable infrastructure, declarative APIs, and a “repeatable deployment process”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Cloud Native Network Function (CNF):** A cloud native network function (CNF) is a cloud native application that implements network functionality. A CNF consists of one or more microservices that have been developed using Cloud Native Principles including immutable infrastructure, declarative APIs, and a “repeatable deployment process”.
```

Reviewer 2: I'd argue this doesn't need changing, as the original text refers to the CNF being `developed using Cloud Native Principles....` as opposed to the micro services.  Not a major issue either way, but I think we took the wording from the work we'd done in the TUG.

Reviewer: @tomkivlin then teh sentence needs correcting

Author: Do we want to say that the microservices have been developed using CNF principles or that the CNF has been developed using CNF principles?
What should be the corrected version?

Reviewer: @EditKoselak I think @tomkivlin is suggesting, "that the CNF has been developed using cloud native principles".  My issue is that if the CNF consists of microservices and that the CNF has been developed using cloud native principles then the constituent microservices should also have been developed using cloud native principles.

Please do whatever you think is right.

Reviewer 3: I agree @pgoyal01 that the microservices should also be developed following cloud native principles. Meaning all **layers** of a network function (or single network service end point) claiming to be cloud native should be implemented following those principles.

Ideally all layers of a workload would be implemented using cloud native principles from the smallest component all the way up.  In the end your workload is a composition of of all the network service end points.  If every network service end point is implemented cloud natively then the entire workload would be cloud native.

Author: Thanks, we have attempted to resolve this issue, please check the updated version:)

  >_*Note:*_ This definition is derived from the [Cloud Native Thinking for Telecommunications Whitepaper](https://github.com/cncf/telecom-user-group/blob/master/whitepaper/cloud_native_thinking_for_telecommunications.md#1.4), which also includes further detail and examples.

- **Compute flavour:** defines the sizing of the virtualised resources (compute, memory, and storage) required to run a workload.
     >_*Note:*_ used to define the configuration/capacity limit of a virtualised container.

> - **Hypervisor:** A piece of software with management components that allows the user to partition the underlying physical resources and allocate them to Virtual Machines. Typically, the hypervisor is managed by a cloud management software such as OpenStack.

Reviewer: Suggest a more standard definition:
Hypervisor, also known as a virtual machine monitor (VMM), is software that abstracts and isolates workloads with their own operating systems from the underlying physical resources.

or from Wikipedia:
A hypervisor (or virtual machine monitor, VMM, virtualizer) is computer software, firmware or hardware that creates and runs virtual machines. A computer on which a hypervisor runs one or more virtual machines is called a host machine, and each virtual machine is called a guest machine. The hypervisor presents the guest operating systems with a virtual operating platform and manages the execution of the guest operating systems.

Author: Thanks, done

- **Instance:** is a virtual compute resource, in a known state such as running or suspended, that can be used like a physical server.
    >_*Note:*_ Can be used to specify VM Instance or Container Instance.

> - **Network Function (NF):**  functional block or application within a network infrastructure that has well-defined external interfaces and well-defined functional behaviour.

Reviewer: is "within a network infrastructure" necessary?
```suggestion
- **Network Function (NF):**  functional block or application that has well-defined external interfaces and well-defined functional behaviour.
```

>   - Within **NFV**, A **Network Function** is implemented in a form of **Virtualised NF** or a **Cloud Native NF**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Within **NFV**, a **Network Function** is implemented in a form of **Virtualised NF** (VNF) or a **Cloud Native NF** (CNF).
```

- **Network Function Virtualisation (NFV):** The concept of separating network functions from the hardware they run on by using a virtual hardware abstraction layer.

> - **Network Function Virtualisation Infrastructure (NFVI):** The totality of all hardware and software components used to build the environment in which a set of VAs are deployed (also referred to as cloud infrastructure).

Reviewer: VA first use; laso minor correction to avoid confusion with the content in parentheses immediately following "VAs"
```suggestion
- **Network Function Virtualisation Infrastructure (NFVI):** The totality of all hardware and software components used to build the environment in which a set of virtual applications (VAs) are deployed; also referred to as cloud infrastructure.
```

 >_*Note:*_ The NFVI can span across many locations, e.g. places where data centres or edge nodes are operated. The network providing connectivity between these locations is regarded to be part of the cloud infrastructure. **NFVI** and **VNF** are the top-level conceptual entities in the scope of Network Function Virtualisation. All other components are sub-entities of these two main entities.

- **Network Service (NS):** composition of **Network Function**(s) and/or **Network Service**(s), defined by its functional and behavioural specification, including the service lifecycle.

> - **Virtual Application (VA):** A general term for software which can be loaded into a Virtual Machine.

Reviewer: do we want to generalise to make a VA run on a VM or container?

Reviewer 2: I'd argue not - for me, we need to distinguish between Virtual applications (i.e. those that have been built with virtualisation in mind) and cloud native applications (i.e. those that have been built with cloud in mind).

Reviewer 2: I'd also argue this is slightly out of scope of the PR (changing to alphabetical listing).

Reviewer: @tomkivlin Sorry my mistake but I thought the "editorial changes in the glossary" covered what I was proposing. The editorial changes proposed by me can be ignored.

Author: Thanks @pgoyal01, we will address the rest of the editorial changes you have suggested:)

Author: We have created an issue to address this: #1905

Author: @pgoyal01, can we resolve this thread?

  >_*Note:*_ a **VNF** is one type of VA.

- **Virtual Machine (VM):** virtualised computation environment that behaves like a physical computer/server.

>   >_*Note:*_ A **VM** consists of all of the components (processor (CPU), memory, storage, interfaces/ports, etc.) of a physical computer/server. It is created using Instance Type together with sizing information or Compute Flavour.  

Reviewer: Instance Type is not defined - is also used later in another definition

Author: Thanks, we have removed the "instance type"

- **Virtual Machine instances Catalogue:** Pre-defined instance types and compute flavours.  

- **Virtual Network Function (VNF):** a software implementation of a **Network Function**, capable of running on the **Cloud Infrastructure**.
  - **VNF**s are built from one or more VNF Components (**VNFC**) and, in most cases,  the VNFC is hosted on a single VM or Container.

- **Virtual resources:**
  - **Virtual Compute resource (a.k.a. virtualisation container):** partition of a compute node that provides an isolated virtualised computation environment.

>   - **Virtual Storage resource:** virtualised non-volatile storage allocated to a virtualised computation environment hosting a **VNFC**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Virtual Storage resource:** virtualised non-volatile storage allocated to a virtualised computation environment hosting a **VNFC**.
```

>   - **Virtual Networking resource:** routes information among the network interfaces of a virtual compute resource and physical network interfaces, providing the necessary connectivity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Virtual Networking resource:** routes information among the network interfaces of a virtual compute resource and physical network interfaces, providing the necessary connectivity.
```

> 

Reviewer: IMO, workloads are not tasks -- workloads perform a set of tasks

> - **Workload:** Workload refers to software running on top of compute resources such as **VMs** or **Containers**. Most relevant workload categories in context of cloud infrastructure are:

Reviewer: I think we are using workload not for any sw running on compute resources but specifically to applications such as VAs, VNFs and CNFs. If yes then we need to modify the definition.

Reviewer 2: Can I suggest this is handled in a PR dedicated to reviewing the definitions and cleaning the wording - this one seems quite specific to changing the order.

Author: We have opened #1906 to discuss this change.

Author: @pgoyal01, can we resolve this thread?

>   - **Data Plane Workloads:** are related to packet handling of the end-to-end communication between applications. These tasks are expected to be very I/O and memory read/write operations intensive.

Reviewer: since the previous part of the sentence ends with an "are:
```suggestion
  - **Data Plane Workloads:** related to packet handling of the end-to-end communication between applications. These tasks are expected to be very I/O and memory read/write operations intensive.
```

>   - **Control Plane Workloads:** are the task related to any other communication between NFs that is not directly related to the end-to-end data communication between applications. For example, this category includes session management, routing or authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Control Plane Workloads:** that perform tasks related to any other communication between NFs that is not directly related to the end-to-end data communication between applications. For example, this category includes session management, routing or authentication.
```

>   - **Storage Workloads:** are all tasks related to disk storage (either SSD or HDD or other).  Examples range from non-intensive router logging to more intensive database read/write operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Storage Workloads:** that perform tasks related to disk storage (either SSD or HDD or other).  Examples range from non-intensive router logging to more intensive database read/write operations.
```

<a name="1.2"></a>
## Hardware Layer Terminology

> - **Cloud Infrastructure Hardware Profile:** defines the behaviour, capabilities and metrics provided by an cloud infrastructure Hardware Layer.

Reviewer: For alphabetical, please move after "Cloud Infrastructure Hardware Configuration"

Author: thanks, done

- **Physical Network Function (PNF):** Implementation of a network function via tightly coupled dedicated hardware and software system.
  >_*Note:*_ This is a physical cloud infrastructure resource with the NF software.

- **Simultaneous Multithreading:** Simultaneous multithreading (SMT) is a technique for improving the overall efficiency of superscalar CPUs with hardware multithreading. SMT permits multiple independent threads of execution on a single [Core](#Core) to better utilise the resources provided by modern processor architectures.

<a name="1.3"></a>
## Operational and Administrative Terminology

- **Cloud service user:** Natural person, or entity acting on their behalf, associated with a cloud service customer that uses cloud services.
>_*Note*_ Examples of such entities include devices and applications.

- **Compute Node:** An abstract definition of a server.
>_*Note:*_ A compute node can refer to a set of hardware and software that support the VMs or Containers running on it.

- **External Network:** External networks provide network connectivity for a cloud infrastructure tenant to resources outside of the tenant space.

> - **Multi-tenancy:** feature where physical, virtual or service resources are allocated in such a way that multiple tenants and their computations and data are isolated from and inaccessible by each another. ([ETSI](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV/001_099/003/01.04.01_60/gs_nfv003v010401p.pdf))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Multi-tenancy:** feature where physical, virtual or service resources are allocated in such a way that multiple tenants and their computations and data are isolated from and inaccessible by each other ([ETSI](https://www.etsi.org/deliver/etsi_gs/NFV/001_099/003/01.04.01_60/gs_nfv003v010401p.pdf)).
```

> - **Quota:** An imposed upper limit on specific types of resources, usually used to prevent excessive resource consumption in the **VIM** by a given consumer (tenant).

Reviewer: to make it generic for both VM and containers
```suggestion
- **Quota:** An imposed upper limit on specific types of resources, usually used to prevent excessive resource consumption by a given consumer (tenant, VM, container).
```

- **Resource pool:** A logical grouping of cloud infrastructure hardware and software resources. A resource pool can be based on a certain resource type (for example, compute, storage, network) or a combination of resource types. An **Cloud Infrastructure** resource can be part of none, one or more resource pools.

- **Service Assurance (SA):** collects alarm and monitoring data. Applications within SA or interfacing with SA can then use this data for fault correlation, root cause analysis, service impact analysis, SLA management, security, monitoring and analytic, etc.

- **Tenant:** One or more cloud service users sharing access to a set of physical and virtual resources ([ITU](https://www.itu.int/rec/dologin_pub.asp?lang=e&id=T-REC-Y.3500-201408-I!!PDF-E&type=items)).
>_*Note*_ Tenants represent an independently manageable logical pool of compute, storage and network resources abstracted from physical hardware.

> - **Tenant (Internal) Networks:** Virtual networks that are internal to tenant instances.

Reviewer: there is no definition for "tenant instance". Instance has been previously defined as:

Instance: is a virtual compute resource, in a known state such as running or suspended, that can be used like a physical server.

Given the above definition, I don't think that is what is meant by "tenant instances".

Author: Thanks for the suggestion! Let`s fix this in another PR.

Author: We have created #1907 to fix this.

Author: @pgoyal01, can we resolve this thread?

A **Container** provides operating-system-level virtualisation by abstracting the “user space”. One big difference between **Containers** and **VMs** is that unlike VMs, where each **VM** is self-contained with all the operating systems components are within the **VM** package, containers "share" the host system’s kernel with other containers.

- **Container Engine:** Software components used to create, destroy, and manage containers on top of an operating system.

- **Container Image:**	Stored instance of a container that holds a set of software needed to run an application.

- **Container Runtime:** The software that is responsible for running containers.
>_*Note:*_ as explained in [OCI Glossary](https://github.com/opencontainers/runtime-spec/blob/master/glossary.md) it reads the configuration files for a
**Container** from a directory structure, uses that information to create a container, launches a process inside the container, and performs other lifecycle actions.

> - **Kubernetes Cluster:** A set of machines, called nodes and master, that run containerised applications managed by Kubernetes. A cluster has at least one worker node and at least one master.

Reviewer: what is a machine -- not defined?

Author: Should we correct "machine" to "server" in another PR?

Author: @pgoyal01, can we resolve this thread?

Reviewer: @EditKoselak Please resolve if addressed in another PR

Author: Thank you:) We opened #1970, so I'll resolve this discussion:)

>_*Note:*_ adapted from [Kubernetes Glossary](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/glossary/?all=true#term-cluster).

- **Kubernetes Control Plane:**	The container orchestration layer that exposes the API and interfaces to define, deploy, and manage the lifecycle of containers.

> - **Kubernetes Master:**	The master node(s) manage the worker nodes and the pods in the cluster. Multiple masters are used to provide a cluster with failover and high availability.

Reviewer: Kubernetes node specifies that it is a VM  or physical machine -- is similar wording needed here?

- **Kubernetes Node:**	A node is a worker machine in Kubernetes. A worker node may be a **VM** or physical machine, depending on the cluster. It has local daemons or services necessary to run Pods and is managed by the control plane.

> - **Kubernetes Service:** An abstract way to expose an application running on a set of Pods as a network service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Kubernetes Service:** An abstract way to expose an application running on a set of pods as a network service.
```

Author: As "Pod" is defined below, I would like to keep it capitalized.

Author: @pgoyal01, can we resolve this thread?

>_*Note:*_ This definition from [Kubernetes Glossary](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/glossary/?all=true#term-service) uses the term "network service" differently than in ETSI NFV.

> - **Pod:**	The smallest and simplest Kubernetes object. A Pod represents a set of running containers on your cluster. A Pod is typically set up to run a single primary container. It can also run optional sidecar containers that add supplementary features like logging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Pod:**	The smallest and simplest Kubernetes object. A pod represents a set of running containers on your cluster. A pod is typically set up to run a single primary container. It can also run optional sidecar containers that add supplementary features like logging.
```

Author: As "Pod" is defined in the glossary, I would like to keep it capitalized.

> Terms not defined by Kubernetes:

Reviewer: suggest making it a sub-section as the alphabetical order starts again
```suggestion
### Terms not defined by Kubernetes:
```

Author: Some of the other terms are also not defined in the Kubernetes glossary. I think we should remove this grouping and merge the CaaS and Caas Manager into the rest of the list.

> - **CaaS:**	Container-as-a-Service. A complete set of technologies to enable the management of containerised software, including a Kubernetes cluster, container networking, storage, routing, service mesh, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Container-as-a-Service (CaaS)**: A complete set of technologies to enable the management of containerised software, including a Kubernetes cluster, container networking, storage, routing, service mesh, etc.
```

>_*Note:*_ The official [OpenStack Glossary]( https://docs.openstack.org/image-guide/common/glossary.html) is an extensive list of OpenStack-related concepts. Some additional terms used in the Reference Architecture RA-1 or used to relate RA-1 terms with terms defined elsewhere.

<a name="Core"></a>
**Core (physical):** An independent computer processing unit that can independently execute CPU instructions and is integrated with other cores on a multiprocessor (chip, integrated circuit die). Please note that the multiprocessor chip is also referred to as a CPU that is placed in a socket of a computer motherboard.

> **Flavor Capabilities** such as (CPU Pinning, NUMA, huge pages): CNTT NFVI Profile.

Reviewer: CNTT NFVI Profile is not defined

Author: Thanks, we have rephrased the definition, know it refers to the Cloud Infrastructure Profile.

**Flavor Geometry:** Flavor sizing such as number of vCPUs, RAM, disk, etc.

> **[Fluentd](https://www.fluentd.org/):** An open-source data collector for unified logging layer, which allows data collection and consumption for better use and understanding of data. **Fluentd** is a CNCF graduated project,

Reviewer: Since Fluentd is a CNCF project and also used in OpenStack environments should this be moved under "Operational and Administrative Terminology"?

Author: Thanks, done:)

> **Host profile:** A set of underlay configuration values used to install a new compute host/server. Typically, the host profile configurations match the capabilities of one or more flavors.

Reviewer: The definition of "host profile" under "Cloud Infrastructure Hardware Profile" is different. Why define it again?

Author: Thanks, we have removed it from here.

**Hugepages:** Physical memory is partitioned and accessed using the basic page unit (in Linux default size of 4 KB). Hugepages, typically 2 MB and 1GB size, allows large amounts of memory to be utilised with reduced overhead. In an NFV environment, huge pages are critical to support large memory pool allocation for data packet buffers. This results in fewer Translation Lookaside Buffers (TLB) lookups, which reduces the virtual to physical pages address translations. Without huge pages enabled high TLB miss rates would occur thereby degrading performance.

> **Kibana:** An open source data visualisation system.

Reviewer: should this be moved under "Operational and Administrative Terminology"?

Author: Thanks, done.

> **Prometheus:** An open-source monitoring and alerting system.

Reviewer: should this be moved under "Operational and Administrative Terminology"?

Author: Thanks, done.

> **Software Defined Storage (SDS):** An architecture which consists of the storage software that is independent from the underlying storage hardware. The storage access software provides data request interfaces (APIs) and the SDS controller software provides storage access services and networking.

Reviewer: this is common to OpenStack and Kubernetes and so should this be moved under "Software Layer Terminology"?

Author: thanks, done

<a name="1.6"></a>
## Cloud Platform Abstraction Related Terminology:

> - **Abstraction:** Process of removing smaller details or attributes or common properties in the study of systems to focus attention on topics of greater importance or general concepts. It can be result of decoupling. ([Wikipedia:Abstraction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstraction_(computer_science)), [Wikipedia:Generalization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalization))

Reviewer: May I suggest some changes:
```suggestion
- **Abstraction:** Process of removing concrete, fine-grained or lower level details or attributes or common properties in the study of systems to focus attention on topics of greater importance or general concepts. It can be the result of decoupling. ([Wikipedia:Abstraction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstraction_(computer_science)), [Wikipedia:Generalization](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Generalization))
```
